---
layout: post
title: When in Rome
type: post
author: Mark
categories: []
tags: []
published: false
---

After a very long day of travel we arrived at our accomodations&mdash;a room in an apartment that had been converted to a miniature B&B.  We opened up our window and realized that the dome we could see in the distance belonged to St. Peter's Basilica.  It appeared to float above the Vatican walls, lit up brightly against the darkening twilight.  After a long car ride, a flight, a bus ride into the center of Rome, and a metro ride towards Vatican City, all punctuated by tiring walks laden down by our luggage, we were happy to find that we had picked out a good place to stay, with friendly hosts and a great view.  To top it off, our hosts recommended a nearby restaurant that was truly excellent.

This was the first of two international trips we took during the third trimester of Jenny's pregnancy.  She was worried about whether she would be able to enjoy it, but we had a good reason for going when we did.  My father, the Director of Bands at Towson University, had planned a tour of Italy for the Symphonic Band during their spring break.  My mother and my uncle and aunt were also going on the trip, and we wanted to see them while they were on the same side of the Atlantic ocean.  Besides, Jenny is always happy to have an excuse to visit Italy.  It was a short trip for us, with just two full days in the country, but we tried to make the most of it.  

On the first morning we walked down towards the main entrance of Vatican City before returning to the entrance of the Museums for our scheduled time slot.  The tourist trade in the area was something to behold; there aren't many places in the world that have enough foot traffic to attract immigrant vendors selling knockoff purses, sunglasses, street art, and all the other popular trinkets of the day.  In addition, there were lots of microentrepreneuers working the long lines waiting for entrance to the museums, offering upgrades and immediate entry.  We mostly ignored them, but I decided to have a little fun with a particularly aggressive one: I addressed him in Russian and said I didn't speak any English, but he was ready for me!  On the reverse side of his clipboard was a Russian language listing of his offers and prices, and he even spoke a little bit of the language.  I hope it was enough for him to understand when I said we already had tickets.

The Vatican Museums are pretty amazing in their own right, but they aren't really the main attraction.  We tried to appreciate some of the works of art and history as we made our way toward the Sistine Chapel.  Elena and I enjoyed looking at the tapestries and deciphering the scripture stories that they depicted.  It was pretty confusing when we saw some that had images from Greek mythology instead of the Bible.  According to Find my Friends, we were in the museums at the almost the same time as my family and the band, we never quite found them.  We eventually made our way into the crowded Sistine chapel and looked up at the iconic frescoes.  Elena and Roman were both reasonably polite and quiet, even though they were getting tired and Elena wanted to continue learning about the subjects of the painting.  I paused for a moment to think, as I tend to do in such situations, about how odd it is that our children have already been so many places and seen so many things, and wonder what they'll remember about their childhoods when they grow up.  After the Sistine Chapel there are several more halls of historical artifacts, but we hurried through them in search of a bathroom and snacks; we all needed a break.

We weren't sure when we would meet my parents, so after the museum we took comfort in lunch at Burger King.  I eventually got in touch, and we arranged to meet near the Piazza San Pietro.  Elena and Roman were so excited to see them!  We toured the Basilica, then made the short walk to the Castel Sant'Angelo, also known as the Mausoleum of the emporer Hadrian, famous in our part of the world for the wall that defined the northern border of his empire.  We didn't know much about the history of the castle, we just knew that it had park area in what used to be the moat, where we were lucky to find a playground.  Eventually, my parents had to head back to meet up with their group, but we made plans to meet the next morning at the Colosseum.