---
author: Mark
title: The Big Ride
categories: []
layout: post
published: false
type: post
---
I don't remember exactly the idea hatched&mdash;it might have been as far back as when they first announced that Yorkshire would host the Grand Depart for the 2014 Tour de France, or possibly more recently, perhaps when they revealed the actual stage maps&mdash;but by the time we had big work lunch one day last spring I was committed enough to riding the full first stage that I started to look for riding partners.  To my surprise, I found two willing companions, Wendy and Joey, sitting at the very same table as me.  We agreed to do it on the Fourth of July, the day before the main event, and that was that&mdash;I knew I needed to start training for real. 

The ride between home and work is a decent commute: about nine and a half miles, uphill on average but with only one really steep bit, which means the ride home is easier and quicker than the ride in.   A good ride in would take me about 36 minutes, but I could make it home in under 30. I started riding it as often as I could manage, even though that was usually only two or three days a week.  With Jenny's support and encouragement, I added in some longer Saturday rides, first 20 miles, then 35 miles with a steep, steep hill, then 40, 50, and even 60 miles.  It was very kind of her to let me go out on my own for hours on Saturday mornings, both when she was in the final weeks of pregnancy and when Kate was a newborn, but she supported my dream ride, and so she supported the preparations.  I climbed some big hills on those long rides, steep enough that I had to get off my bike and walk at times, and always had a tremendous feeling of accomplishment when I made it to the top, no matter how long it took.  After my 60 mile ride, I was pretty sure that I would be able to complete the long ride, all 127 miles of it.

It seems to happen before many big adventures that a last-minute setback unexpectedly threatens the whole project, and this time was no different.  On my commute one day, I had to unclip from my pedals suddenly and applied enough force to break the clip.  I went to the bike shop for a replacement, but the order didn't come through in time, so on the afternoon before the big ride, I found myself looking all over town for a replacement.  I ended up with a new set of pedals and cleats, which were only partially compatible with my shoes; I had to make extensive modifications to get everything to work.  With help from my father, I did sort everything out, took a brief test ride, and decided that the new pedals were fit for duty.

At six am the next morning, we gathered at the appointed spot, in front of the home of some friends, who woke up very early to send us off.  Wendy was wearing a brand new polka dot jersey that she had picked up at the Tour de France team presentation ceremony in Leeds the previous night, while I wore green and Joey wore white.  (I don't recall what Lee had on.)  Early on, we realized that riding as a group was not in the cards; after an hour or two, Lee decided to go at his own pace and take a shorter route home; although it was only half the distance, it still had some substantial climbs.  I led the way for much of the early going, which in hindsight was not a good idea, but I felt strong at the time.  For the most part, Wendy and I rode together, but Joey would come rolling through every time we stopped for even a moment; it felt like a real life hare and tortoise situation.

The roads were very well marked; at every intersection, a permanent marker pointed the way; I expect that they'll still be there if I ever want to do the ride again someday.  EVen better than the official markers was the non-stop stream of decorations and tributes lining the course&mdash;hundreds of bikes, bunting, streamers, and nearly any other imaginable item that could be produced in or painted yellow, complemented by the other colors of the tour.  Riding through Ilkley, Otley, and Skipton was glorious.

Riding up the smallish hill out of Skipton, I still felt pretty good; unfortunately, things only got harder from there.  As we entered the dales, the road surface got worse and my lack of fitness began to show, but was nothing too worrisome, so we continued on.  After stopping to fill our water bottles in Kettlewell, I began to see just how many other cyclists there were out there; not all of them were riding the full route, but we all had the same basic idea.  We found ourselves riding out of the village with another group of riders and spent a few minutes in conversation.  They asked if we were doing the whole ride, and then warned us that Buttertubs was not a small undertaking.  Before long, I realized how right he was, when a route marker pointed us towards a narrow side street and onto the infamous climb.